src/gallium/targets/d3d10umd/README.md, before:

When compiled with `gallium-driver=llvmpipe` or `gallium-driver=softpipe` the resulting libgallium_d3d10.dll implements D3D10's software rendering interface, like WARP.


It can be used directly from WLK 1.6 and WHCK 2.0 D3D10+ tests, via the -Src
and -SWDLL options. For example:

    wgf11blend.exe -Debug -DoNotCatchExceptions -DXGI:1.1 -FeatureLevel:10.0 -Src:SW -SWDLL:libgallium_d3d10.dll -LogClean -LogVerbose

However, as of WHCK version 2.1 this mechanism no longer works reliably.
Either you use WHCK 2.0 binaries, or you must use the alternative method
described below (of copying libgallium_d3d10.dll into the executable directory and rename
it such that it matches the D3D10 UMD of the test machine).


Examples can be easily modified to load it too:

    D3D10CreateDeviceAndSwapChain(NULL,
                                  D3D10_DRIVER_TYPE_SOFTWARE,
                                  LoadLibraryA("libgallium_d3d10"), /* Software */
                                  Flags,
                                  D3D10_SDK_VERSION,
                                  &SwapChainDesc,
                                  &g_pSwapChain,
                                  &g_pDevice);

    D3D11CreateDeviceAndSwapChain(NULL, /* pAdapter */
                                  D3D_DRIVER_TYPE_SOFTWARE,
                                  LoadLibraryA("libgallium_d3d10"), /* Software */
                                  Flags,
                                  FeatureLevels,
                                  sizeof FeatureLevels / sizeof FeatureLevels[0],
                                  D3D11_SDK_VERSION,
                                  &SwapChainDesc,
                                  &g_pSwapChain,
                                  &g_pDevice,
                                  NULL, /* pFeatureLevel */
                                  &g_pDeviceContext); /* ppImmediateContext */


Alternatively, it can be renamed into the system's D3D10 UMD driver (e.g.,
vm3dum_10.dll for VMware vGPU, nvwgf2um.dll for NVIDIA GPU), and placed into
the application directory, or system's directory, and used instead.

For the DLL to be picked from the application directory you'll need to do the
following once:

    reg add "HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager" /v "SafeDllSearchMode" /t REG_DWORD /d 0 /f

See also https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/dlls/dynamic-link-library-search-order

Commit message:

d3d10umd: Fixes building with mingw/gcc and windows sdk/ddk 10.0.26100.0
Avoid recursive include between DriverIncludes.h and Debug.h

Signed-off-by: Yonggang Luo <luoyonggang@gmail.com>
Part-of: <https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/36844>

src/gallium/targets/d3d10umd/README.md, after:

# D3D10umd Readme

When compiled with `gallium-driver=llvmpipe` or `gallium-driver=softpipe` the resulting libgallium_d3d10.dll implements D3D10's software rendering interface, like WARP.

It can be used directly from WLK 1.6 and WHCK 2.0 D3D10+ tests, via the -Src
and -SWDLL options. For example:

    wgf11blend.exe -Debug -DoNotCatchExceptions -DXGI:1.1 -FeatureLevel:10.0 -Src:SW -SWDLL:libgallium_d3d10.dll -LogClean -LogVerbose

However, as of WHCK version 2.1 this mechanism no longer works reliably.
Either you use WHCK 2.0 binaries, or you must use the alternative method
described below (of copying libgallium_d3d10.dll into the executable directory and rename
it such that it matches the D3D10 UMD of the test machine).

Examples can be easily modified to load it too:

    D3D10CreateDeviceAndSwapChain(NULL,
                                  D3D10_DRIVER_TYPE_SOFTWARE,
                                  LoadLibraryA("libgallium_d3d10"), /* Software */
                                  Flags,
                                  D3D10_SDK_VERSION,
                                  &SwapChainDesc,
                                  &g_pSwapChain,
                                  &g_pDevice);

    D3D11CreateDeviceAndSwapChain(NULL, /* pAdapter */
                                  D3D_DRIVER_TYPE_SOFTWARE,
                                  LoadLibraryA("libgallium_d3d10"), /* Software */
                                  Flags,
                                  FeatureLevels,
                                  sizeof FeatureLevels / sizeof FeatureLevels[0],
                                  D3D11_SDK_VERSION,
                                  &SwapChainDesc,
                                  &g_pSwapChain,
                                  &g_pDevice,
                                  NULL, /* pFeatureLevel */
                                  &g_pDeviceContext); /* ppImmediateContext */

Alternatively, it can be renamed into the system's D3D10 UMD driver (e.g.,
vm3dum_10.dll for VMware vGPU, nvwgf2um.dll for NVIDIA GPU), and placed into
the application directory, or system's directory, and used instead.

For the DLL to be picked from the application directory you'll need to do the
following once:

    reg add "HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager" /v "SafeDllSearchMode" /t REG_DWORD /d 0 /f

See also <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/dlls/dynamic-link-library-search-order>

## Building with MSVC

Install Windows SDK 10.0.26100.0 and Windows DDK 10.0.26100.0 with MSVC and use it, other version of Windows SDK/DDK
may also work but not verified.

## Building with mingw

Install Windows SDK 10.0.26100.0 and Windows DDK 10.0.26100.0, other version of Windows SDK/DDK
may also work but not verified.

Copy the following list of files from Windows SDK/DDK into mingw's `include` folder or `include\winddk` folder in mesa source tree:
    ```txt
    d3d10umddi.h
    d3dkmddi.h
    d3dkmdt.h
    d3dkmthk.h
    d3dukmdt.h
    d3dumddi.h
    dxgiddi.h
    dxmini.h
    wmidata.h
    ```
